It has been said that without writing a single line, Jesus set more pens in motion than any other man.
Of all those pen men, none are better known than Matthew, Mark, Luke and John.
In this video series, we will journey through time to see some of the earliest known manuscripts that contain their work
and precious fragments of manuscripts that came before.
Have their gospel accounts been transmitted accurately down to our day?
Do they truly bear evidence that their writers were guided by the Holy Spirit?
Travel with us to find out.
In the late 1800s, archaeologist Sperner Grandfell and Arthur Hunt went to Egypt in search of ancient Christian documents.
Soon, under the centuries' worth of rubbish near the town of Oksarinkus, they struck gold in the form of documents written on papyrus, an ancient form of paper.
At the time they discovered it, this single leaf was part of the oldest known copy of Matthew.
At the top, it bears the words of Matthew 1 verse 1, the book of the history of Jesus Christ.
This fragment was the earliest witness to the greatest man who ever walked the earth.
In the years that followed, Grandfell and Hunt collected some 500,000 fragments at Oksarinkus, many of which are biblical and now reside right here in Oxford.
Amongst them, other fragments from Matthew.
Analyzing and understanding these manuscripts and scraps became known as paparology, deciphering letters and words, putting the pieces together, painstaking work, like doing a fragile jigsaw puzzle.
To keep track of significant Greek scripture papyrae, referencing systems were developed, typically a number preceded by the letter P for papyrus.
So for example, this is P77.
It's in two pieces, but they're from the very same page.
This one is P70.
It contains portions of 16 verses, including the earliest record of Jesus' prophecy that the good news of the kingdom would be preached in all the inhabited earth.
P77 and P70 are just two of many fragments that Grandfell and Hunt unearthed.
There finds a loan contained portions from 13 different chapters of Matthew.
It stirs the imagination to think that these were written and in use perhaps 17, 1800 years ago.
But there is one more important piece of the jigsaw to be found here in Oxford.
The old library at Modeling College is home to about 20,000 rare books, but its oldest item predates them all by over a millennium.
P64, dated to around 200 CE, is now regarded as one of the earliest known Matthew fragments.
The writing on the front and back shows that they were originally part of a codex or early book.
Some have only a few words left intact, but even the tiniest of puzzle pieces can help form a faith strengthening picture.
P64 contains evidence of one of Matthew's most distinguishable traits, highlighting the fulfillment of Hebrew scripture prophecies.
In this case, Zechariah's prophecy about the price for Jesus' betrayal, 30 pieces of silver, a detailed unique to Matthew's account, and not to be missed by a former text collector.
Scholars who have examined these texts attest to the close continuity of meaning between these earliest fragments and later manuscripts which form the basis for our translation today.
They say one man's rubbish is another man's treasure.
That was true for Grenfell, Hunt and others who excavated in Egypt.
Thanks to their work, the drifting sands of time that once buried these fragments have been brushed away.
All of this gives us confidence that the text of Matthew remains essentially unchanged.
Credit for that can only go to Jehovah.
The Gospel of Mark is an action-packed account, recalling at least 19 of Jesus' recorded miracles.
Although only two early fragments are known to have survived, the most significant one, P45, features portions of 12 of those miracles.
No wonder the very first verse of this Gospel declares its theme to be the good news about Jesus.
It's the perfect opening line.
When it comes to the book's conclusion, however, there has been some controversy.
In fact, three different versions of it have circulated for centuries.
How can we know which one to trust?
The earliest Bible manuscripts can help.
Casually wrapped in paper, the Codex Saniaticus is on its way to the British Museum.
The Codex Saniaticus is the earliest manuscript that preserves the entire Greek scriptures.
It was the work of at least three trained scribes in the fourth century, who based their work on earlier texts.
You're doing it.
Accumulated through the centuries behind the walls of the Vatican Library,
the Codex Vaticanus is also dated to the fourth century.
And although a few portions have been lost over time, the Gospels remain completely intact,
these priceless manuscripts are regarded as key sources by modern Bible translators.
And here at our Bethel Museum in Britain, we are going to take a look at two exactly similar editions.
These codices were written on parchment, the skin of calves or goats or sheep.
Around 360 animals would have been needed to produce the Codex Saniaticus alone, a very expensive endeavor.
But it was clearly worth it, as parchment typically lasted longer than papyrus.
These manuscripts provide context, which is lacking in papyrus fragments.
And because they were completed as early as the middle of the fourth century,
they have greater authority than later manuscripts.
All of this is helpful when considering how Mark's Gospel ends.
In the New World translation, Mark's Gospel ends at chapter 16 verse 8,
where we are told that after visiting Jesus' tomb, the women fled, trembling and overwhelmed with emotion,
and they said nothing to anyone, for they were in fear.
Unlike the other Gospels, Mark doesn't report on any post-resurrection encounters with Jesus.
The closest we get to him is an empty tomb.
Some later readers evidently felt that this conclusion lacked enough closure to have been the original.
From the fifth century onwards, manuscripts appeared with alternative conclusions, some with two additional verses, and others with twelve.
What about the Codex Vaticanus? Let's see for ourselves.
Here, the original Greek has been translated, and going out, they fled from the tomb, for trembling and astonishment had seized them,
and they said nothing to anyone, for they were afraid.
Below that, the ancient ink states, according to Mark, indicating the end of the book.
The Codex Sanaticus also concludes this way.
Together, these two pillars provide strong support for verse 8 as the original ending penned by Mark.
Thanks to the survival of precious manuscripts like these, we can be confident that we have the complete text of Mark's Gospel.
So why the seemingly abrupt ending?
While the Gospel writers each had their own style, and simply put, Mark's was brevity.
Guided by the Holy Spirit, Mark's concise style produced the shortest yet most dynamic portrayal of Jesus,
as a man of action, a man of miracles, and a man of true compassion.
Luke, known to early Christians as the beloved physician,
P-75, dated to around 200 CE, preserves an account unique to Luke's Gospel, one which no physician could ignore,
Jesus bringing a widow's son back to life at name.
This fragment is therefore the earliest testimony to Jesus' earliest recorded resurrection.
The emergence of P-75 in the late 1950s was significant.
The large number of pages that had survived allowed for a comprehensive comparison with the later Codex Vaticanus.
The two were found to be nearly identical.
So the text of this Gospel has been accurately transmitted down to our day and is trustworthy.
But is the information on these pages equally trustworthy?
Actually, a single sentence reveals the answer.
At the beginning of chapter 3, Luke records a list of officials in authority when John the Baptist began to preach.
Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate, Herod, Philip, Lyceneus, as well as Annus and Caeophus, seven in total.
Now Luke's Gospel, as stated at its outset, is fact, not fiction.
So there should be historical evidence of these officials and of when they ruled.
So what does history say?
Tiberius Caesar, second emperor of Rome, well attested to in literature and archaeology, as we would expect.
Next, Herod Antipas, son of Herod the Great, and district ruler of Galilee.
Among other evidence, inscriptions bearing his name, as well as Cointy commissioned, have been found.
Philip, his half-brother, confirmed by historians to be the tetrarke or territorial prince under Tiberius.
Former high priest Annus and his son-in-law, Caeophus, both are noted by ancient historians and are also associated with this family tomb by many modern historians.
Confirmation of five of the seven officials isn't bad, but what about Pontius Pilate?
He's called Pilate many times by the other Gospel writers, but only ever Pontius Pilate by Luke.
And what about Lyseneus, whom Luke linked to Abelini, a rather insignificant territory?
Now, it should be mentioned that the Roman Empire's preference was to leave local government in place in their conquered territories.
As a result, those in authority could be referred to in different ways by a Roman title or by a local one.
This created a potential for error, so much so that some historians might have played it safe, not daring to go to Luke's level of detail.
Had his strength become his weakness, would five relationships not have suffice?
For centuries, Pilate and Lyseneus existence was questioned, but then archaeology brought to light these stone inscriptions.
Confirmation of both rulers' existence and when they ruled.
Seven officials, seven overlapping reigns, all tied together in time by means of just one sentence.
This is authentic history, but what does this mean for us?
By setting his narrative in the context of Tiberius Caesar's 15th year in power, Luke pinpoints the start of John's ministry to 29 CE.
As a result, the date of Jesus' baptism, his appearance when he became the Christ, a far superior ruler, is in a sense written in stone.
Luke was moved by the Holy Spirit to trace all things with accuracy, no wonder one scholar called him a historian of the highest order.
John, the last gospel to be written, yet this account takes his father back in time than any other.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God.
P66 and P75 preserve those words, the earliest record of the earliest moments of Jesus' pre-human existence.
John's religious opposes viewed him as uneducated and ordinary.
His vocabulary was smaller than most other writers of the Greek scriptures.
Yet his use of simple words and simple sentences helps us grasp the most profound truths.
One word that stands out is the Greek word often rendered truth.
It appears three times as often in this gospel than all the others combined.
Yet the truthfulness of this gospel has itself been challenged.
Between John 753 and 811, some ancient manuscripts include an account about Jesus sparing an immoral woman.
Others do not.
So does this account belong in the inspired record penned by John?
Or did someone else take it upon themselves to add it later?
What do the earliest witnesses say?
Codex BZ from the 5th century includes the account.
But Codex Ephraim and Codex Alexandrinus are both missing this page of John completely.
Yet, careful measurement by scholars indicates that these codices would not have had enough space on the missing pages to include the account.
The earliest and most authoritative manuscripts, Codex Anaticus and Codex Vaticanus, do not include this passage.
What about the earlier fragments, P66 and P75?
Although the pages of chapter 7 and chapter 8 survive, they bear no trace of the account at all.
So the verdict is clear, the account of the immoral woman is spurious, meaning it was added centuries after John completed his gospel.
Now it seems clear that the further back in time we travel, the closer we get to the original words of truth.
But there is one more stop that we do not want to miss.
So we've come to the John Rylands Library in Manchester, known locally as the Cathedral of Books.
This is Papyrus 52, dated by some scholars to around 125 CE.
It's a fragment of the oldest copy of John.
In fact, it's the oldest fragment of the Christian Greek scriptures that has ever been found.
What does it contain? Another simple yet profound sentence.
For this I have been born and for this I have come into the world that I should bear witness to the truth.
P52's early date testifies to how quickly John's gospel spread.
By about 170 CE, his account was combined with Matthew, Mark and Luke in the work commonly called the Diatessaron, a Greek word meaning through the four.
This work testifies that before the end of the second century, these four inspired accounts alone were regarded as the definitive account of Jesus' life.
In John's last verse, he tells us that if all other things Jesus did were written in detail, the world itself could not contain the scrolls.
Walking through a room like this, you feel the weight of those words.
We can't help but be in awe of what Jehovah has accomplished by using his Holy Spirit to guide the gospel writers and by preserving their accounts.
He has left us with a remarkably trustworthy and intimate portrayal of his son.
More than any other book in the world, these four, along with the rest of the Bible,
convinces that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God.